This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. George R.R. Martin is one of a group of new
writers born in the post-war baby boom who is becoming a powerful force in the
field of science fiction. We asked Martin his definition of science fiction.
Science fiction isn't about science. It's about old literature. It's about
people and moral issues and the way people relate to each other and good and bad
and love and death and pain and sorrow and all of that stuff. The only thing
that's different about it is he uses a different set of symbols. It tries to get
us out of our here and now world just as traditional fantasy has done for
centuries. But instead of using fantasy type symbols, it uses symbols drawn from
what essentially is the new religion of our modern age, science and technology.
The theme that pervades much of Martin's early work is the intrusion of cold,
hard reality into romance. Martin comments on this element.
The dreams that I grew up with, that other writers of my
generation grew up with. Howard Waldrop, John Varley, people like that have
spoken about it in their own writings. And then the reality unfolded. Our dreams
came true. But they didn't. It wasn't the same dreams. It changed. And in most
cases, it changed for the worse. For the worse. I used, there was a story of
mine called Patrick Henry, Jupiter and the Little Red Brick Spaceship that's
included in Songs of Stars and Shadows. Probably not one of my most famous
stories or one of my better stories. But it's one in which this particular
question is addressed in a very direct kind of manner. Because I use a
protagonist who feels the same way. The World Science Fiction Convention, when
Apollo 11 landed on the moon, gave them a special award for best moon landing
ever. Which I think is completely untrue. In science fiction, there are lots of
moon landings that are much more exciting than the one that Apollo 11 did. In
fact, that's a whole point. I support the space program. I dream of, I think,
it's a route that mankind should go to. And in some ways, it's very tragic
what's happened to it. And what's happened to it is that NASA really messed it
up. They took the greatest adventure in human history and through a supreme
superhuman effort, have managed to make it boring. And that's what's happened to
the American space program. And that's what I tried to address in that
particular story. But the theme in other contexts runs through a lot of my work,
particularly my early work. The fact that we need dreams to sustain us. And that
the dreams are often, I mean, that's part of what morning comes miss fall too.
The dreams are better than the reality. Truth and beauty. Beauty is truth.
Truth, beauty. That is all you know and all you need to know. But it's not true.
Some things are beautiful, but not true. And some things are true, but not
beautiful. I grew up in Bayonne, New Jersey. Little industrial city right
outside of New York. At the time, it was one of the major oil refining centers
in the world. It was true, but it wasn't very beautiful.
And I read books that took place on, you know, Mars and the asteroid belt and
planets of other stars. And they were pretty beautiful in their way, but they
weren't true. So things
don't work out that conveniently. And that's the whole reality romance thing
that much of my work does concern itself with. In an early Martin story,
Slideshow, the space effort is maintained through contributions garnered at
fundraisers. But I wanted to express the fact that I did have reservations and
humanitarian concerns and all that about Earth. But I still think the weight of
that story is very much towards the space thing. And how pitiful it has become
where they have to go around and give slideshows to rich people and hope to get
a little contribution to continue it. But I do see us going that way. More on
George Martin in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Bill Vernon. Our show today continues the discussion
with science fiction author George Martin. While we were interviewing Martin, he
expressed to us his idea that the American space program is in the doldrums
because of a poor public relations effort by NASA. According to Martin, if NASA
were to play on people's dreams of exploring the unknown, rather than to harp on
the mundane, tangible benefits, the space program would be much better off. Part
of the reason that we're going that way is the way NASA has sold it. I mean,
it's totally, totally inappropriate. They're trying to make people, they have
people who are poor, they have people who are suffering through social cutbacks,
they have people who don't have enough to eat, whose children are ill-clothed,
who are suffering from poverty and crime and stuff like that. In other words,
who have a hell of a lot of problems in their life. And they're trying to say,
well, we're cutting back social programs, but we don't want to cut back the
space program, and you ought to support this decision because it gave you Teflon
frying pans. Now, if somebody doesn't have any chicken to cook up, the fact that
their frying pan may have Teflon on it is not going to convince them. And the
fact that the space program produced Teflon frying pans is of little interest to
them. Ditto hand calculators. And all of the other benefits the space program is
supposed to have brought us and didn't even brought us. But these same people
have television sets on which they watch sports. You know, probably were all
very excited about the Super Bowl and the World Series.
Follow Adventure Series and all that. And there's the potential support for the
space program. Not the practical, dull, accountant's cell where they show them
the balance sheets and say, well, here's a little Teflon, you know. If you want
to get public support by a space program, you have to get it by making it
exciting, by making it an adventure.
And it is an adventure. It's a colossal adventure. It's enormously exciting. Why
the hell am I addicted to it? Why are all these people here? Why did our entire
generation growing up, reading Willy Ley and Wernher von Braun and what was
going to happen and the dinosaur projects and the flying wing and the space
stations we were going to have? It was marvelous, heady, wonderful stuff. And
instead they're selling us Teflon. I mean, it's just nonsense. It's the
excitement of it that they should sell us. The strange things that might be
discovered. The adventures that are there to be had. The dream of it. That's the
real powering thing. Not that they're going to be able to make better ball
bearings in space because of weightlessness. But the dream of it. That's what
they should push.
Music plays a major role in many of Martin's works. From stories such as The
Lonely Songs of Laren Dorr and For a Single Yesterday. To the titles of two of his
collections. A Song for Lya and Songs of Stars and Shadows. A popular song,
Brandy, even influenced the plot of the short story "Fast Friends". We asked
Martin if he himself was a musician. Well, none whatsoever. No background
whatsoever. I like songs, music. But I really have no aptitude for it. I used to
live with, when I was living in Chicago, I had a number of musician roommates
for a while. And they would bring in other musician friends of theirs who would
invariably, because the whole group were musically inclined in one way or
another, would say to me, what instrument do you play? And I would say, I play
the typewriter. That's about the closest I've gotten. More on George Martin in
our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio
Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. Science fiction writer George Martin is the
subject of our show today. Martin spent almost a decade writing short stories
before he published his first novel. Here he comments on the importance of the
short story to the beginning writer. I think that's just the way you break into
the field. And that's one of the strengths of science fiction, is that it's one
of the few branches of literature that still has a viable short story market,
where young writers and beginning writers can learn the ropes, can get their
initial publication. Novels, on the other hand, are not the best way to begin,
as Martin tells us. Novels are large. Novels are formidable pieces of work. You
just don't knock them off in a week or so. And you really have to know what
you're doing.
I wrote a lot of short stories in my early years. Some of them are good, I like
to think. Some of them are maybe even excellent. And some of them are terrible.
And I learned a lot through the process of doing that, and also through the
process of selling them. If I had been writing novels, I mean, it would be very
easy to wash out writing novels. You spend a year and a half writing a book, and
then no one wants to buy it. It's terrible. Or it falls apart at the end. Part
of it's good, part of it's bad. That's a bad way to begin, I think. I've always
felt that it's much better, especially in a field like science fiction, where
you can publish your short stories for any kind of young writer to begin with
short stories, to learn his craft there, also to establish a name for himself by
selling to the market. It's a much sounder commercial strategy. Martin believes
that if one does not establish himself as a short story writer first, it's more
difficult to break into print. You see in the modern, present commercial
marketplace of literature, you see a whole lot of books coming out, first
novels. There's nothing that's more deadly than a first novel. That was not
always the case
in science fiction. Once upon a time, there was a large enough audience that
bought every science fiction book that came out that a writer publishing his
first novel could be short a certain minimum thing. Science fiction's gotten too
big for that now. That's no longer the case. So, a lot of people, Joe Blow
writes his first novel, sells it because it's pretty good, he gets published, he
just dies a dismal, dreary death, because no one's ever heard of him. So, unless
he has some gimmick, unless there's some reason, nobody reads his novel, nobody
gives him a chance. The way I did it, in hindsight, is much the better way. I
built up a reputation over five or six years for my short stories. And when I
finally did write Dying of the Light, my first novel, it was not by Joe Blow. It
was the first novel by George R.R. Martin, ta-da, trumpets, drumroll, and the
world was much more receptive to it than had I thrown it out beforehand. So, I
think any writer wanting to break into science fiction should begin with short
stories and should make a reputation with those and then make the transition to
novels. At the end of each story in Martin's collections is a date and a
location. We asked Martin why he ends his stories in this manner. Instead of
writing the end, you put where you were and what time the story was written. And
it helps put them in a chronological perspective for readers who are interested
in kind of observing the writer's growth because the order that they're
published in is often not at all an appropriate indication of the order that
they were written in, publishing schedules being what they are. Some stories are
rushed into print. Some are held for years. Some stories you can't sell for
years. And you finally find a place for them and they come out five years after
you wrote them.
So, to really get an idea of what kind of evolution changes a writer goes
through, those sorts of dates are important. In our next show, we'll discuss
Martin's novel, Dying of the Light.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Bill Vernon. In today's show, we continue our discussion
with science fiction writer George Martin. Martin's first novel was the
enthusiastically received, critically acclaimed Dying of the Light. The story
behind the title of this novel is interesting. I wrote the book as After the
Festival, which was my title for it. I sold the book to Pocket Books. At the
same time, I sold the version to Analog for serialization in Analog Magazine.
And they wanted it cut considerably. So I cut it for them by 30,000 words, which
is a pretty substantial cut. And when I did that, I said, well, I want this
serial version published under a different title. Because I don't want people
reading a serial and thinking they've read the book. Not when there are 30,000
words difference. The book is a lot better than the serial. So I told the editor
of Analog to call the serial version Mock Man. Because my book was going to be
called After the Festival, which I had written it under. He didn't like the
title Mock Man, but he kind of agreed under protest. Then, my book publisher
calls back and says that the higher up, Peter Mayer, who was running the company
at the time, big publishing hotshot, not a science fiction editor, but the head
of the whole Pocket Books empire then, he didn't like After the Festival as a
title. Because it wasn't science fictional enough. They were willing to make it
after the Star Festival, but that gave me goosebumps and made me want to
decapitate someone. So I said, no, no. But they threw out after the festival. So
I had to come up with a new title. I came up with about 12 of them, most of
which were pretty limp. And I sent in the list of these 12, kind of dreading
which one they would pick, because I didn't like any of them. And then, like two
days after I sent in the list, I thought of Dying in a Light. And I liked that
title a great deal. I liked it almost as much as After the Festival. It's real
close. Right now, I wouldn't know which title I liked best. They're both very
appropriate for the book. And the publisher liked Dying in a Light. I sent it in
two days after the list of 12 bad suggestions. And the publisher said, oh, Dying
in a Light. That's fine. We'll call it that. At that point, I called up the
editor of Analog and said, well, I still want a different title. But After the
Festival is now free because the publisher changed it. So call the serial
version After the Festival. So my original title was used on the serial version,
and the Dying of the Light title from Thomas was used on the book, the fuller
version. One of the themes Martin explores in Dying of the Light is that of the
misunderstanding that can develop between people from different cultures. It's a
very significant point of the book is the role of names, which I call it in the
book, the importance of names, really the importance of language and
linguistics, to what we are able to think, to what we are able to conceive. The
hero of Dying of the Light, the protagonist, gets in trouble throughout the book
because he insists on making false translations. He'll see something and he'll
say, well, these people are slaves. But they're not slaves. They're, you know,
there's a word for it in the book, an alien word, and it's different. There are
important differences from slavery. But he sees it only in his own terms. He
sees people and he has to define them as friends, let us say. When the word is
tain, it means something very different, similar in some ways, different in
other ways. And to really understand another culture, you have to be able to
think in their language, in their terms, and not make false translations to your
own terms that simplify and distort simply by the act of translating. More on
George Martin in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. 1980 was a successful year for science
fiction author George Martin. Martin received the Hugo Award for his short
story, The Way of Crossing Dragon, and both the Hugo and Nebula Awards for his
novelette, Sand Kings. Sand Kings is one of those timeless stories that is
destined to be a classic. In 1981, the novel Windhaven was published. It was
written by Martin in conjunction with Lisa Tuttle. Well, every collaboration is
different. It's like a marriage. There are no rules. What we said was a very
easy sort of collaboration. We would talk about collaboration with good friends
and all that. When we got together, we talked about the initial story. Then
we're going to write it. The way it would work is one of us would start. We'd
write a certain amount of pages, a certain 20 pages, shift them up to the other.
The second one would rewrite that section. I'm going to go on and write some
more material. And that. First, rather, we'd rewrite the portion. The second one
would go on. For each of us, essentially, we'd write the other one's section.
And we alternated it in the first draft. After having worked out the broad
outlines of the plot together in the country. And it all took place too, now. We
learned that Windhaven as a novel was not the original intent of Martin and
Tuttle. Rather, it started out as a shorter story. Actually, it began as a much
shorter story. A thing called My Brother's Wings that we completed in
collaboration. It showed it to Ben Bova. It doesn't really run satisfactorily.
It seems to be much longer. And he was right. And we went back and expanded it.
And we produced the storms at Windhaven. But I think by the time we finished
that, it was pretty clear to us that. There needed to be more. By the time we
did One Wing, years later, we let years relax in between the writing of the
first and second parts. We knew exactly what we were doing. We had the structure
of the entire book and the role that One Wing played, both in relation to storms
that came before and in relation to the fall that came after. So by then, One
Wing was written, both as an individual and today and as part of the book. Much
of the novel's action is centered on the characters flying about on wings
mounted on and powered by their arms. We asked Martin about the research you did
to ensure that the mechanical aspects of flying are practical. Well, I did some
research on hang gliding. I got, you know, I got some books on it and, and read
so I'd be able to give the story to various military required. And we must have
done fairly well in terms of accuracy. We had hang gliding magazines serialized
storms of wind tape and effort came out. So, obviously, they would not have done
it if they'd been too full of egregious errors.
And in fact, I noticed, I picked up, years after, like, the original story came
out in hang gliding magazine, I picked up another issue of hang gliding
magazine. I discovered that all these people were selling Windhaven altimeters
and, you know, the Windhaven brand, uh, Regalo sales, and, uh, you know, like a
brand name or something like that. So, impressed someone out there. Martin
explained the plans he and Tuttle have for Windhaven. My conception of it is as
a, as a real trilogy. That is to say, neither one big book nor a series of
unrelated books. But, essentially, we began two stories in the beginning. We
began the story of Maris and Lesser Amberly, which ended at the end of
Windhaven. And we also began a story about the social changes initiated by
Maris. And that, that social changes ripping through the culture, helping all
sorts of things. That story is not concluded. That story requires more violence.
But, hopefully, there's only, there will only be the two of them that we have
originally conceived. If, uh, you know, if that is, if you look around ten years
from now and you find that I'm working on the ninth Windhaven book, at least so
you will know that I have sold out. And, hopefully, that, that, that will not
happen.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.